---
layout: post
title: "Not a mouthpiece but a model"
---

> "All this could be feminism, or whatever Parton wants it to be—giving, giving back, walking in God’s light. When she’s fixing to change course, I trust she’ll let us know."

I enjoyed [this article](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2020/10/19/the-united-states-of-dolly-parton) on Dolly Parton, by [Prof. Lauren Michele Jackson](http://www.laurjackson.com) (Northwestern), published in the October 19, 2020 issue of *The New Yorker*. I wholeheartedly recommend the article to anyone who has the slightest interest in Dolly Parton's music and her broader careers. At its core, though, the article is (in my reading) a defense of Parton's way of feminism in particular and Parton's political instinct more generally. 

I suspect Jackson's article might have come forth partly because of Parton's support for the "Black Lives Matter" movement, which has apparently spurred controversy among the more politically conservative part of Parton's fanbase. (For evidence of controversy, one needs to look no further than *Saving Country Music*'s [arduous, almost desperate, attempt at arguing that Dolly Parton did *not* support the "Black Lives Matter" movement](https://www.savingcountrymusic.com/dolly-parton-did-not-support-the-black-lives-matter-movement)). In a better world (I say "better" because in an ideal world "Black Lives Matter" need not be uttered in the first place), of course, no one's support for the movement should be controversial in and of itself. But what makes things interesting in the case of Dolly Parton is that her public persona is as complicated as it is charming. More to the point, I do think there is a side of her, which, over the years, has been meticulously constrained when it comes to public statements on political and cultural matters (which, I may add, Parton is often invited to make, something telling enough in and of itself). This is so despite her unapologetically progressive artistic voices ranging from "9 to 5" (1980) to "Travelin’ Thru" (2005). This reflects, I think, Parton's ingenuity rather than insincerity. As a country artist first and foremost, she has had to learn to get her point across without *sounding* political. But whether something sounds political or not is a function of what one's conception of what politics is--or, for that matter, of the conception of politics one assumes of one's audience. So here and elsewhere it would be mistaken to look at the form of speech only and not the substance. To do so would be to, in Sarah Smarsh's words (a critically-acclaimed book discussed in Jackson's article), view someone whose cultural presence is as grandiose as Parton's merely as a *mouthpiece*, and not the *model* that she lives to exemplify. 

A complaint to what is a larger point I mostly agree with, though, is that Smarsh's mouthpiece-model distinction clarifies as much as it obscures. For to be an artist is to play both of these two roles, and being a mouthpiece is not inconsistent with being a model. Indeed, one can argue that, throughout her music career both as a singer *and* as a songwriter, Parton's always managed to excel at both. Understanding this duality is not always easy, however, especially for those who fail to recognize the inherent political nature of being an artist. 

Take Parton's "He’s a Go Getter", for example, a song explicitly discussed in Jackson's article in connection to Smarsh's book. Once again, I wholeheartedly recommend the article. But here I'll add that even though Parton's song is not presented *as* political (released in 1969, it probably couldn't have been), it is a not-so-subtle tongue-in-cheek take on the intersectional struggle of a poor, working-class woman prisoned in an exploitative marriage arrangement. The not-so-subtle part comes early on in the song. ("I know that most of you will know the kind I'm talking about / The kind that rather than have to work, he'd rather do without.") Yet for the most part the song is ostensibly observational only. This is in part due to Parton's choice of confining the song's narrative to nothing but what is apparently common knowledge around town about Parton's "neighbor that lives down the road". But as the song progresses, the listener is invited to wonder as to where the song's punned title and chorus line came from. ("But he's a go getter, a go getter / When his wife gets off from work, he'll go get her.") Did it come from within the narrative, or was it Parton's own wit? If the latter, how, if at all, does Parton, the storyteller, fit into the narrative? If the former, did the phrase "go-getter" originate in the inner dialogue of the woman who is being exploited by her husband, or, perhaps more plausibly, did it result from a white Appalachian community's own struggle with the patriarchy and patriarchal gender norms? Further--and this is a subtle point to appreciate--the more self-aware listener is also afforded the opportunity to wonder why it is that "most of you will know the kind I'm talking about". (In other words, even when Parton interrogates you, it doesn't seem like interrogation.)

These are questions intentionally left unanswered. But the crucial point is that, whichever interpretation one lands on at the end of this barely-over-two-minute song, an unequivocal political statement can be extracted, some more damning than others. In this sense, Parton *is* a mouthpiece for fighting against a persistent, pernicious injustice that she no doubt had observed through her own eyes. A seasoned, sophisticated mouthpiece at that. I've become increasingly concerned with a popular sentiment along the lines of "if you don't speak up you're complicit". I understand the rationale behind the sentiment, but I worry it encourages moral grandstanding and it leaves very little room for nuance, among other things. Yet perhaps its most pernicious consequence is that it will tend to distort what "speaking up" means. 
